# 3SIM: Blockchain Simulator for Investigating the Blockchain Trilemma

3SIM is a flexible, software-architecture-focused blockchain simulator for investigating the blockchain trilemma. More information can be found in the [thesis paper](https://gitlab.kit.edu/ucplh/davis-riedel-bachelor-thesis).



## Running 3SIM

### Prerequisites

Make sure the following prerequisites are installed:

- Eclipse 2025-06 RAP
- Palladio Nightly Plugin
- Java 17 or higher

### Installation

1. Add the 3SIM update site to your Eclipse installation.

2. Install the following features from the 3SIM update site:
    - `Kotlin Dependencies`
    - `Blockchain Systems Component Model (BSCM)`
    - `Blockchain Simulator Core`
    - `3SIM`

### Usage

1. Create a new Palladio project in Eclipse.
2. Open the `Palladio` perspective.
3. Model your blockchain system by creating `.blockchainsystem`, `.blockchainsystemComponentRepository`, `.nodeallocation`, and `.linkallocation` files
4. Create a `3SIM Simulation` run configuration.
5. Run the simulation by executing the `3SIM Simulation` run configuration.



## Project Structure

### Packages

- `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.threesim_plugin`: The entry point of the 3SIM Eclipse plugin.
- `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.threesim`: The business logic for the 3SIM blockchain simulator.
- `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.plugin`: Common base Eclipse plugin for Palladio-based blockchain simulators.
- `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.core`: Common logic and abstractions for Palladio-based blockchain
  simulators.
- `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.bscm`: Ecore-based metamodel for the 3SIM blockchain simulator.
- `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.loggers`: Loggers to log trace events of the blockchain simulation to console, file, or database.
- `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.kotlin-deps`: Provides the kotlin-stdlib, kotlinx.serialization and kotlinx.coroutines libraries as OSGi bundles.
- `releng`
  - `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.target_platform`: Target platform definition for the 3SIM Eclipse plugin. The target platform file is automatically merged with the Palladio target platform, and thus currently empty.
  - `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.updatesite`: Builds an update site that can be used to install the 3SIM Eclipse plugin.
- `features`: Contains features that can be installed via the update site. See next section for details.


### Features

- `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.feature.bscm`: A feature that contains the Blockchain Systems Component Model (BSCM) metamodel. It includes the following packages, which are generated by ecore / genmodel:
    - `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.bscm`
    - `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.bscm.edit`
    - `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.bscm.editor`
- `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.feature.kotlin-deps`: A feature that contains the Kotlin dependencies for the 3SIM Eclipse plugin. It includes the package:
    - `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.kotlin-deps`
- `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.feature.core`: A feature that contains the core logic and abstractions for Palladio-based blockchain simulators. It includes the packages:
    - `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.core`
    - `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.loggers`
    - `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.plugin`
- `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.feature.threesim`: A feature to install 3SIM. It contains the packages:
  - `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.threesim`
  - `org.palladiosimulator.blockchainsystems.threesim_plugin`
 

### Additional Resources

- `threesim-config-generator`: Contains Kotlin Notebooks to generate models for 3SIM.
- `threesim-workspace`: Eclipse workspace that contains the models used in the thesis paper.



## Development

### Prerequisites

- Install 3SIM and its prerequisites as described in the [Installation](#installation) section.
- Maven
- [Just](https://just.systems/)

### Build Commands

- Run `just verify` to verify the build.
- Run `just build` to build all features and the update site.
- Run `just clean` to clean the previous build artifacts and build cache.

### Building Individual Features

You can only build individual features by running `just build-feature "<feature-name>"`. The depended upon features will be reused from the build cache.

You must run a full build with `just build` at least once before you can build individual features, to populate the build cache. You must always rebuild a feature if you change the source code of its packages.

Building individual features is useful, because features that rarely change, e.g. the BSCM feature, do not need to be rebuilt every time. Furthermore, since each build generates a new snapshot version, Eclipse would reinstall the feature. By not building unchanged features, we can thus speed up the build process and installation of the 3SIM Eclipse plugin.

### Debugging

1. Specify the path to your eclipse executable as `ECLIPSE_EXECUTABLE` in a `.env` file in the root directory of the project.
2. Run `just debug` to start Eclipse in debug mode.
3. Connect to the remote Java debugging port `5005` using your IDE of choice.



## Acknowledgements

3SIM was developed by _Davis Riedel_ as part of his bachelor's thesis at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) under the supervision of _Prof. Dr. Ralf Reussner_, _Prof. Dr. rer. nat. Robert Heinrich_, and _Dr.-Ing. Niclas Kannengießer_. 3SIM is based on SM-SIM, which was developed by _Yannik Sproll_.
